

I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves and fills me with delight. 



the sun is forever visible, 



this wind of promise, 



wondrous power which attracts the needle 



never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man. 



all mankind, to 



ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, 



These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my letter, and 



for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual 



good Uncle Thomas' library. 



made for purposes of discovery 



Homer and Shakespeare are 



sckencd faded with art



These visions faded 



greatest practical advantage. Twice 



The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a 



How slowly the time passes here, 



evil, I have no friend, 



I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the 



romantic, 



Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen. 



he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. 



unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity. 



"What a noble fellow!" you will exclaim. 



but then he is wholly uneducated: 



The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, 



safety of others is committed to my care. 



am going to unexplored regions, to "the land of mist 



There is something at work in my soul which I do not understand. 



more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good spirits: 



No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter. One or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, 



But success SHALL crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man? 



this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut 



"Before I come on board your vessel," said he, "will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?" 



restored him to animation 



but I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, 



although with a foreign accent. 



I never saw a more interesting creature: his 



route which the demon, 



From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck 



appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin. 



evinced to use the language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. 



One man's life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener's countenance. 



Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, 



my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing. 



Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures. 



a penetration into the causes of things, 



You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. 



see his thin hand raised in animation, while 



Strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus! 



While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. 



The world was to me a secret which I desired to divine. 



agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed. 



was the secrets of heaven and earth that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of 



recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness 



my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean 



The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. 



but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a 



Wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if I could banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable 



I attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. 



avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars 



Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction. 



but when she heard that the life of her favourite was 



feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. 



persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have 



Chance—or rather the evil influence, the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the moment I turned my reluctant 



had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent 



my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur 



for realities of little worth. 



my interest in science was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth. 



They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows." 



far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation. 



exclaimed the soul of Frankenstein—more, far more, will I achieve; treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation. 



The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind." 



A man would make but a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge 



my future destiny. 



Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? 



with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries. 



Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, 



Darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived 



Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. The 



I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter. 



What had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world was now within my grasp. 



unguarded and ardent as I then was, to your destruction and infallible misery. 



Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature will allow. 



It was with these feelings that I began the creation of a human being. As 



often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which 



but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. 



A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind. If 



but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded me supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation. 



dreary night 



anxiety that almost amounted to agony, 



His limbs were in proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful. Beautiful! 



The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature. 



I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. 



the courtyard belonging to the house which I inhabited, 



demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life. 



Dante 



Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. 



Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection. 



But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge." 



I dreaded to behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him. 



could hardly believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me, 



But I was not the witness of his grief, for I was lifeless and did not recover my senses for a long, long time. 



The form of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was forever before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. 



remember the first time I became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. 



The blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they never change; and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws. My 



fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. 



When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms. 



had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy. 



He meant to please, and he tormented me. I 



When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that 



When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing 



When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful sensations. 



wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to convey 



About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murder's finger was 



"Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of festering, the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with hatred for your enemies. 



How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is at 



The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever. 



"Dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your wanderer? Your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?" 



The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. 



The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil; but 



Alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime? 



rely on her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. 



The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such deep and bitter agony. I 



removes more than half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my innocence is acknowledged 



But I, the true murderer, felt the never-dying worm alive in my bosom, 



cannot live in this world of misery." 



Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. 



I wandered like an evil spirit, 



I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. 



for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society." 



was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore—often, I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities forever. 



There was always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained behind. My 



and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. When 



sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the 



nought had changed in those savage and enduring scenes. 



the habitations of another race of beings. 



Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed. 



The very winds whispered in soothing accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more. Then 



The same lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion. 



These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillized it. 



effect of solemnizing my mind and causing me to forget the passing cares of life. 



the presence of another would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. 



which enable you 



Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us. We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.      We rise; one wand'ring thought pollutes the day. We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,      Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away; It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,      The path of its departure still is free. Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow;      Nought may endure but mutability! 



"Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life." 



"All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life? Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind. If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends." 



The tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched devil! You reproach me with your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I so negligently bestowed." 



Life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it. 



thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my joints more supple. 



Remember that I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and 



There can be no community between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall." 



was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures, who owe me nothing? 



The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen 



Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands." 



On you it rests, whether I quit forever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of your own speedy ruin." 



half frightened, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. 



learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed 



but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. 



but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. 



resting from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger and thirst. This roused me from my nearly dormant state, 



"It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the original era of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. 



multiplicity of sensations 



I sat down and wept. 



the only object that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and 



the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing. 



inclemency of the season, and still more from the barbarity of man. As 



for I saw the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. I 



until something should occur which might alter my determination. It was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence, the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. I 



began to play and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. 



but on the appearance of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and 



end to the pleasure I experienced in watching my human neighbours. 



struck me was the gentle manners of these people, and I longed to join them, but dared not. 



The young man and his companion often went apart and appeared to weep. I saw no cause for their unhappiness, but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? 



but when I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots which I gathered from a neighbouring wood. 



I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a godlike science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. 



become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted. 



admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was I terrified when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! 



looked upon them as superior beings who would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I 



although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration. 



Happy, happy earth! 



My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy." 



although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek 



dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists. 



safie as nature spring goodness happiness



Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in two months I began to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. "In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to 



and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that was spoken. 



Was man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He 



at one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. 



To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing. 



When I looked around I saw and heard of 



none 



like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned? 



Oh, that I had forever remained in my native wood, nor known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat! 



"Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that there was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state which I feared yet did not understand. 



to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. 



What did this mean? Who was I? What was I? Whence did I come? What was my destination? These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to solve them. 



He had come forth from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. 



'Accursed creator! Why did you form a monster so hideous that even YOU turned from me in disgust? God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and encourage 



To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity. 



"Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant, did I not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with their shrieks and misery. 



The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin. 



"The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some degree of tranquillity; 



benevolence! I had saved a human being from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone. The 



all joy was but a mockery which insulted my desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure. 



'I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.' 



This being you must create." 



The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, 



The prospect of such an occupation made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream, and that thought only had to me the reality of life. 



put an end to my slavery forever. 



He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky. "This is what it is to live," he cried; "how I enjoy existence! But 



Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country." Clerval! Beloved friend! Even now it delights me to record your words and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. He was a being formed in the "very poetry of nature." His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the world-minded teach us to look for only in the imagination. But even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind. The 



Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life of its creator;—has this mind perished? Does it now only exist in my memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend. 



At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history. 



and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places. 



For an instant I dared to shake off my chains and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self. 



It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. 



Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. 



I shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, 



selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race. 



wickedness." "Slave, I before reasoned 



Remember that I have power; you believe yourself miserable, but I can make you so wretched that the light of day will be hateful to you. You are my creator, but I am your master; obey!" 



Man! You may hate, but beware! 



Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful. I 



Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict." 



If I returned, it was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a daemon whom I had myself created. 



again felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, 



I looked upon the sea; it was to be my grave. "Fiend," I exclaimed, "your task is already fulfilled!" 



How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the excess of misery! I 



but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; 



I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not abhorred! They were my brethren, my fellow beings, and I felt attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right to share their intercourse. I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! 



"the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations. A 



Memory brought madness with it, and when I thought of what 



heavy storm of rain descended. 



Nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change. 



"Man," I cried, "how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is you say." 



"By the sacred earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the 



daemon who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes forever. And I call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony; 



let him feel the despair that now torments me." I 



Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure; I was cursed by some devil and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. 



Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. 



Often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed 



"My reign is not yet over"—these words were legible in one of these inscriptions—"you live, and my power is complete. Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am impassive. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive." 



I had determined, if you were going southwards, still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I 



What a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He 



Even where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. 



They know our infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. 



These feelings are transitory; each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair. 



"What do you mean? What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then, so easily turned from your design? 



Did you not call this a glorious expedition? "And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome. 



Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and who know 



How all this will terminate, I know not, but I had rather die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. 



Think not, Walton, that in the last moments of my existence I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of my adversary. During 



"That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I momentarily expect my release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I hasten to their arms. 



Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, 



The monster continued 



had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived." 



Evil thenceforth became my good. 



The completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there 



"Wretch!" I said. "It is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you have made. You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power." 



Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which I was capable of unfolding. I 



But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. 



When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But 



When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. 



For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not satisfy my own desires. 



Nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings! I, the miserable and the abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my blood boils at the recollection of this injustice. 



"But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. I have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have 



but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I regard myself. I 



He is dead who called me into being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. 



"Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death? 



"Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might not cause greater wretchedness; and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than that which I feel. Blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close them forever. 



shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The 



shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus. Farewell." 



in darkness and distance. 





"Unhappy man! Do you share my madness? Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? Hear me; let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!" 



"we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves—such 



Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. 



seem still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth. 



same dangers which have rendered me what I am, I imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, 



which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; 



would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. 



the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. 





been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had taken among the scenes of my native country. 



and they gained additional strength from the salubrious air I breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and the conversation of my friend. 



serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy. The 



sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and 



I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, 



Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding aiguilles, and 

A Storm of Swords - George RR Martin (Matthew Palmer)







The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and bitterness. The 



Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, 



the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive 



benevolence! I had saved a human being from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone. The feelings of kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. 



through; at any rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had endured. 



exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, 'I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.' 



"You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. 



I am malicious because I am miserable. 



You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he pities me? You 



You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance. But that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union. 



This passion is detrimental to me, for you do not reflect that YOU are the cause of its excess. If any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature's sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realized. 



My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker." 



"by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my prayer, 



"Oh! Stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness." 



you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me. 



Great God! Why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across 



but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where lay the body 



and coldness of the limbs told me that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth whom I had loved and cherished. 

Catch-22 by Joseph Heller (Matthew Palmer)



Yossarian asked.    ‘They’re shooting at everyone,’ Clevinger answered. ‘They’re trying to kill everyone.’ 



senseless curiosity 



in giving the life and spirit to the 



that might be useful to my fellow creatures. 



now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. 



I trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects. 



I must pursue and destroy the being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die." 



me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst. 



had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived." "And do you dream?" said the daemon. "Do you think that I was then dead to agony and remorse? He," 



I am alone. 

